Okay, this is the first oral history to be done for the Project 6 People to Collections
Ellen Lynx Landscape Partnership Programme.
I'm Stephanie Cruz, the Ellen Lynx Cultural Heritage Officer, and we're here in the Ellen
Lynx office at the Agents House in Ellen Village.
It's the 3rd of October and I have with me Howard Sandilands of Casagobnia Prestine.
Howard, thank you very much for coming in.
Pleasure.
And we're going to talk about some photographs that you sent me in, but just before we can
kick off on those, if you could just tell me a little bit about your family, your parents,
what they did.
Well my parents were married in 1937 and I was born in 1946 in London.
I have a brother who's three years older and we grew up in London.
My father had his own business which was started by my grandfather.
I spent my childhood years and my school years in London before moving to basically
Worcestershire as a pre-college student before I went to agricultural college.
And then after college I spent a year abroad in Africa coming back to join an American
company in the agricultural industry.
And I stayed with them and their successors until 2007 when I retired on disability.
I'm guessing from your accent you might have spent a little bit of time in America.
35 years.
Yes.
Yes, 35 years.
So I enjoyed every minute of it.
Good.
And what brought you back?
Well my late wife died in 2005 and subsequently I met an old friend who I actually had met
in Worcestershire during my pre-college practical days and she'd been on her own for many years
and we got married in late 2008.
Lovely.
We were living in America at the time.
She's English and I dragged her to America.
But for one reason or another which I won't go into, we decided that we would spend our
retirement years back in the UK.
So I returned to the UK finally two years ago.
We'd previously purchased an old stone barn in Kasgov back in 2010 and we converted that
and that is where we're currently living.
Lovely.
Yeah.
So what was it that you sent me in?
Pictures of your parents and a visit to Ellen Valley when you were approximately how old?
Well it was probably about 1957 and I can date that because of what I looked like at
that time.
Yeah.
It's an odd story because back in 2012 my wife Mary and I thought we'd come out to
Ellen Valley, a glass of coffee and have a look around and as we drove from the visitor
centre around the reservoir I suddenly stopped the car because I said to her, I've been here
before.
It was just one of those moments when you visualise all those years ago when you were
a child that you'd been here.
You didn't know exactly when.
And I looked and there was a little parking space with a waterfall and that is one of
the photographs that I'm showing you here.
And then as I looked down the road I saw, which is probably the memory I had of the
reservoir with a little cottage on the hillside.
And I can remember at the time we spent probably a couple of hours at this particular spot
and some photographs were taken but I couldn't remember exactly which ones they were.
But I knew that my mother had sat on a rock somewhere by the waterfall.
I remembered that.
So we took some photographs and when I got home some weeks later I sorted through all
the old photographs from the family and it was just an amazing fact because it's almost
exact.
It's almost exact.
Absolutely.
There's a photograph taken, my mother and my father, my mother sitting on this rock
where I had sat and the other photograph which you can see here, which is of me standing
by a piece of walling was actually in actual fact where my mother stood beside the car
we had some 60 years before.
So it was one of those moments that I'm sure everyone has.
They can go back into their childhood and their memories in their childhood are normally
more distinct than they were yesterday.
They certainly are for me.
So that's really the story behind the photographs.
We came back to Wales subsequently probably for the next three or four years as a family
until my brother was old enough to do what he wanted to do.
I know that I came back with my parents probably when I was 14 but we would come to the Allen
Valley and we would also go to Valor and Trorsfinnid on our way to Snowdonia.
Right.
Where we spent a number of pleasant holidays in that area.
And was the sun always shining?
No, the sun was not always shining.
Well, it is Wales.
Not always shining at all.
But yes, and now we come back to Allen Valley.
Probably three or four times a year we came back I think the last time earlier this year
we decided to have a picnic at the place with that little waterfall and park the car and
walk down the road and over the stile.
There's a stile now by that little parapet.
We now have a dog.
So the idea was to bring the dog and we came early in the morning.
It was the worst thing we could have possibly done because there were more gnats around
than anything.
But it's a lovely place to come.
The interesting thing that I do remember is that there was no traffic then.
Yes.
We were probably the only car, maybe one or two more.
The visitors car park wasn't as full as it is during midsummer and this would have been
taken in probably August time, July or August.
The roads were obviously much narrower.
Very, very little traffic.
Actually quite pleasant.
Yes.
And what kind of car is it that your father drove?
That was a little standard 10.
I don't know the name.
Who made those?
Standard Triumph.
It became Standard Triumph.
Yes.
And was that the first car that you remember having?
No, no.
The first car he had after the war was an Austin 10 and I do remember taking that to
Cornwall or being in it in Cornwall during very, very bad weather.
And my brother and I spent most of the time mopping water which was coming through the
back windows.
So there we are.
So now you sort of like drive up around the valley?
Yes, we drive around the valley and up and over the top and come back into Raida.
We have in actual fact gone towards Aberystwyth but the road is very narrow.
Over the top road.
Yes.
Lovely drive.
But we don't try and do it in August or July.
Normally in the spring or the fall.
So are there any other memories of the valley that you have?
Any of the dams?
Yes.
Each of them you remember.
As children we would obviously get out of the car and walk where you could walk across
the dam and peer over.
But because it's so long ago sometimes you get confused with which dams you actually
went across because there are a number of dams obviously in this valley but there's
there's less I believe in Baller and in Shor's Fenny because this one's on more of a different
levels whereas the others were just flooded.
Yes, it's the series of them.
The interesting thing when you look at these photographs though, I mean apart from the
waterfall but if you look at this what I find fascinating is that a lot of the trees that
were there 60 years ago were already mature and today although there is more vegetation,
more trees it's still very much distinguishable.
That's the same place obviously.
It is.
And I did take another photograph of the little cottage here which is not very distinct but
it is exactly the same.
It hasn't changed one iota on the hillside there.
And unfortunately with only being new in post I'm not sure where the location is in terms
of naming the dam and the cottage.
Well this is if you look on the map it's the extension it's quite some distance from the
visitor centre.
So it's actually goes round and stops.
Right, I shall get an expert on that.
Or you can try it down there you can actually see the waterfall.
Go and see where it is.
But you're absolutely right the cottage itself which is visible in both the photographs looks
exactly the same and whilst the foreground of the cottage is a little bit more, sort
of like it has more trees in it now, it does, just the whole landscape is still exactly
the same.
It's great.
You know you can go to some places that you visited many many years ago and you just think
is this the same place because the vegetation has grown, trees have grown, people have changed
houses and put extensions on or they've been pulled down and rebuilt.
But here there is no question.
No absolutely not.
And I have to say the picture of your mum and dad at the waterfall that is by repute
one of the places that everybody is very fond of.
Oh absolutely.
Yeah.
I think it's a lovely little spot and it always looks really peaceful and a lovely place to
actually sit.
So did you in your younger days, did you have picnics and things when you?
Oh yes.
There was always picnics.
We'd go to some little, I suppose they probably weren't called delicatessens at the time,
but little local shops and pick up some bread and cheese and various things.
And we'd normally have a flask of coffee or tea.
I don't know.
I've never drank coffee in those days but I probably drank something.
And we would have a picnic.
Yes.
I mean most of our holidays in those days were going to and staying in bed and breakfast.
And we wouldn't travel great distances but within a two week trip we might stay at four
or five places.
But we did find in Snowdonia at the bottom of the Glanberis Pass a farmer.
His name was Hughes Jones and we stayed with them.
My mother stayed with them for many years afterwards after we'd grown and left home.
As it started off as a bed and breakfast and became very good friends so we'd stay with
them.
But most of them were people that we'd just stay a night or two nights.
Because it's quite a journey from London up in those days.
Oh yes, yes.
We used to start off about two o'clock in the morning.
And then travel up.
Sleep a lot of the way then.
Yeah, sleep a lot of the way.
Good days.
Great memories as children.
We were very fortunate because to have a car and to just be able to travel.
We saw a lot of southern England as I said before particularly the southwest and all
Wales.
Oddly enough we never went to South Wales until I was probably a little bit older.
I can remember probably the first time we went to Pendean Sands and that area was when
I was 14 or 15.
But I think we covered every single piece of coastline between Portland and Bill.
All the way round, all the way up to Western Supermair and the same in Wales.
From the other side of Cardiff or the other side of Swansea.
All the way round the bay.
And spent a lot of time in Snowdonia.
The nice thing about Wales for us as children was that they had railways, narrow gauge railways.
The Bay of Vardong, Welshpool, Lanfair, Taddef Lynn and then up in Snowdonia you could get
into the slate quarries then and they'd show you around and they had their little steam
engines for hauling the slate.
So that was a big interest for my brother and myself.
We used to have a railway when there was a bit of a down.
That's right.
A lot of people don't know about that but it goes all the way down the side of the valley.
And you've got some lovely photographs of the dams when they were almost just jointed
on the side, the railway track, when they were actually building it.
Yes, they've got some pictures up in the office.
But yes.
Well thank you very much for that Howard.
It's been really interesting talking to you and most grateful for the photographs and
for you coming in.
Thank you very much.